    Author: Fredrik Frantzen <frazze(at)erlang(dot)org>
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Erlang-Version: OTP26
    Created: 25-Jan-2023
    Post-History:
****
EEP 61: Allow definition of a local type inside a spec.
----

Abstract
========

This EEP provides suggestions on syntax for specifying local types
in a spec. This will enable users to define a custom type local to
the function spec for documentation purposes.

Motivation
==========
In erlang you may write the following:

    -type person() :: #{name := string(), age := integer()}.
    -spec my_fun(A,B) -> C when
      A :: person(),
      B :: integer(),
      C :: person().
or

    -spec my_fun(person(), integer())->person().

Often times a type may be something simple as an alias for an integer():

    -type age() :: integer()

The type name is used as documentation to make a spec clearer, this can
be done with variables as well, but you need to be extra careful to not
reuse the same variable in multiple places, as that tells dialyzer to
guarantee that the values (not types) are equal.

    -spec my_fun(Person, Age) -> Person when ... <-- WRONG!
    -spec my_fun(Person, Age) -> UpdatedPerson when ...

Another problem with this is that if there are users of this function
outside the module, dialyzer expects that the calling module also
knows about the return type used in the function (requiring an
`-export_type` clause). This results in the return type being part of the api.
We would like to be able to specify types for documentation, but not have the
types visible outside the module. This problem can be seen in this [PR](https://github.com/erlang/otp/pull/6116).

Details
=======
Here is a suggestions on syntax:

    -spec my_fun(Person, Age) -> UpdatedPerson when
      -type person() :: #{name := string(), age := integer()},
      Person :: person(),
      UpdatedPerson :: person(),
      Age :: integer().

Omitting the `-type` prefix of local type declaration row might be sufficient as well.
Inherit variable bindings and local types from the spec

    -spec my_fun(Person, Age) -> UpdatedPerson when
      -type age() :: integer(),
      -type person() :: #{name := string(), age := age()},
      Person :: person(),
      UpdatedPerson :: person(),
      Age :: age().

When a module calls this function dialyzer should ignore the type alias
and just interpret the type as a construction of native types. I.e.

    #{name := string(), age := integer()}  % person is translated to this

Consideration
=============
An alternative would be to allow definition of local types in the module
instead of the spec. Types not specified in an `-export_type` clause could
be considered a local type. You would need to jump out of the function
to define each type in this case which may not be as ergonomic as defining
them inside the spec.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================
Parser and Dialyzer needs to be updated to support local types differently
from standard types.
Other type tools external to OTP also needs to be updated.
Once supported, there should not be any problems to call function in a module
that uses local types inside specs, as they should just look like a structure
of native types.
If we decide to change some exported "OTP" types to be local, then that
may cause issues outside of OTP.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.

[EmacsVar]: <> "Local Variables:"
[EmacsVar]: <> "mode: indented-text"
[EmacsVar]: <> "indent-tabs-mode: nil"
[EmacsVar]: <> "sentence-end-double-space: t"
[EmacsVar]: <> "fill-column: 70"
[EmacsVar]: <> "coding: utf-8"
[EmacsVar]: <> "End:"
[VimVar]: <> " vim: set fileencoding=utf-8 expandtab shiftwidth=4 softtabstop=4: "
